AI #1311: Add Contract columns to Cost and Usage dataset (#1327)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/columns/contractappliedcost.md

> # Contract Applied Cost

Reviewer: We expect multiple Contract Commitment IDs, and the associated Contract Commitments Applied Cost values may vary. If that’s the case (i.e., one size doesn’t fit all coexisting commitments), what should we expect in Contract Applied Cost and Contract Applied Quantity?

Author: The application of varying costs and quantities to the Commitment level would need to be handled in a separate column -- likely JSON, per my current thinking -- that would be a list of Contract Commitment IDs and the applicable costs/quantities.  `Contract Applied Cost` and `Contract Applied Quantity` would be the application at the Contract level.  [Here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1l42uPa_XhHTgnaOW1tFHQBGL7dEIss3-onsSuY5qVuc/edit?gid=1641662850#gid=1641662850) is the conceptual sketch I did for these ideas.

Reviewer: I think I didn’t phrase my question very well.

Let’s imagine this scenario:

* A contract has multiple build-up commitments that can be linked to a specific charge.
* Each commitment has its own Contract Commitments Applied Cost.

In that case, what should we put in Contract Applied Cost?

Based on the following two requirements, **it MUST NOT be null**, but **there is no single value that applies to all associated commitments**:

> * ContractId MUST NOT be null when a *charge* is related to a *negotiated discount*.
> * ContractAppliedCost MUST NOT be null when [Contract ID](#contractid) is not null.

Author: It's a good question.  Maybe it means that we need to model burndown and build-up in the same level of Contract Commitment, and jettison application at the Contract level...?

I've really wanted to keep build-up use cases out of scope, but maybe we have to consider it in order to avoid refactoring later...

> # Contract Applied Cost

Reviewer 2: Is this really applied to the contract? Isn't it applied to a commitment, which is separate from the contract? For Microsoft it is, at least. For instance, MACC is separate from the contract itself. MACC is not tied to a discount. (Although many think it is.) MACC is a negotiating tool sales teams use to establish a commitment, which makes them more comfortable with higher discounts. But the MACC is not the same as the contract.

Author: @flanakin 
The idea is to eventually model _both_ the Contract _and_ the Commitments that are described in the Contract.  [Here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1l42uPa_XhHTgnaOW1tFHQBGL7dEIss3-onsSuY5qVuc/edit?gid=1641662850#gid=1641662850) is the working spreadsheet I've presented in the last few TF1 calls that describes the approach.  Contracts are modeled in 1.3; Contract Commitments are modeled in 1.4.  The TF1 attendees have agreed with this approach, namely: @ijurica, @rileyjenk, @deejacruz, @cnharris10, @marc-perreaut, and @Matt-Cowsert (though I believe @rileyjenk would like to model it all at once to increase value).

In the Microsoft world, are you saying that the contract and the MACC have different IDs, and that the MACC is a child of the contract?  Or are they wholly separate entities?  I'd be curious for you have a look at that spreadsheet I linked and tell me how those items would fit (or not) into the proposed schema.

I'd be happy to go over this with you 1:1 between now and next TF1 -- or if you want to come to TF1 next week, we can discuss further.

> Contract Applied Cost represents the cost of the charge applied to the contract.  Contract Applied Cost is applied to the contract via [Contract ID](#contractid).  Contract Applied Cost is commonly used for monitoring the progress towards fulfilling contractual commitments that facilitate discounts for [*resources*](#glossary:resource) or [*services*](#glossary:service) as negotiated between a provider and a customer.

Reviewer 2: nit: "Contract Applied Cost is applied to the contract..." presents itself as self-defining, but I'm not sure it is. I think I understand what this is covering... One possible idea:
```suggestion
Contract Applied Cost is the portion of a charge counted toward a specific contract, identified by its [Contract ID](#contractid). Contract Applied Cost is commonly used for monitoring the progress towards fulfilling contractual commitments that facilitate discounts for [*resources*](#glossary:resource) or [*services*](#glossary:service) as negotiated between a provider and a customer.
```

Fwiw, it's not really applied to the contract. It's applied to a commitment.

The ContractAppliedCost column adheres to the following requirements:

> * ContractAppliedCost MUST be present in a [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports *negotiated discounts*.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't it only be required when there's a commitment-tracking mechanism? Someone may offer negotiated discounts where everything applies and there's no need to track what was or wasn't applied, right?

Author: A change is likely needed here, yes.  Per [this comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1327#discussion_r2270323894) on the related presence requirements for Contract ID, both @rileyjenk and @marc-perreaut expressed a concern in today's TF1 about this condition (or indeed _any_ condition), and they are going to produce a suggested revision (which would apply to this line too).

* ContractAppliedCost MUST be of type Decimal.
* ContractAppliedCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#numericformat) requirements.
* ContractAppliedCost nullability is defined as follows:
  * ContractAppliedCost MUST be null when [Contract ID](#contractid) is null.

>   * ContractAppliedCost MUST NOT be null when [Contract ID](#contractid) is not null.

Author: @ijurica points out that all of our cost columns in FOCUS so far must be present and null is not allowed.  This would set a precedent of allowing nulls in a cost column, which could introduce an issue for practitioners that are aggregating whole datasets that include nulls.

Reviewer 2: Fwiw, I think nulls are inevitable. If we don't allow nulls, you're going to get a `0` when that is factually incorrect. That also goes against our null handling requirements, which say you can't use placeholder values when there is no value. `0` would be a placeholder value in this case, which sends the wrong message.

FYI: Microsoft uses `0` in place of a real price/cost when they don't have the data. This means practitioners can't tell the difference between something being free and the data not being available.

Author: @flanakin I agree.  However, we have a precedent set of keeping all cost columns null -- so this would introduce a difference that we would have to make sure we explain clearly, either here within the spec, or as part of our supporting content.
